As a result, GOP state Rep. Stephen Freind of Delaware County, the legislature 's leading foe of abortion, has been given all but free rein to press a strict seven-point plan to restrict abortion and, he hopes, to force the Supreme Court directly to reassess its 1973 Roe v. Wade decision that established the right of abortion in the first place.
The Freind legislation -- the state 's House Judiciary Committee approved it in Harrisburg this week and the full Pennsylvania House is expected to take up the bill next Tuesday -- includes a provision to ban abortions after 24 weeks of pregnancy, except to avert the death of the mother.
Mr. Freind calculates that the provision, which attacks the trimester standards that Roe established, will "make it necessary" for the Supreme Court to review Roe and, perhaps, to overturn it.
But the Pennsylvania measure also includes an "informed consent" provision that may become widely imitated by abortion foes who want to make women contemplating abortion as uncomfortable as possible with the procedure and with themselves.
Under this legislation, a woman must be informed 24 hours before the operation of the details of the procedure and its risks.
"Regardless of whether one supports or opposes the right to an abortion," Mr. Freind argues, "it is virtually impossible for any rational human being to disagree with the concept that a woman has the right to have all of the appropriate materials and advice made available to her before she makes a decision which, one way or the other, might remain with her for the rest of her life."
In Michigan, where the state Senate is expected to approve parental-consent legislation by the end of next week, Gov. Blanchard is the principal obstacle for anti-abortionists.
Susan Rogin, a consultant to abortion-rights activists in the state, takes comfort from the fact that the state 's House abortion opponents "have n't been able to muster the votes to overturn a veto on abortion in 16 years."
But proponents believe they may be able to shake enough votes loose to override the veto if they are successful in portraying the legislation as a matter of parents ' rights.
In Illinois, lawmakers will vote before next spring on legislation requiring physicians to perform tests on fetuses at 20 weeks to determine their gestational age, weight and lung maturity along with a provision requiring that, if fetuses survive an abortion, a second doctor must be on hand to help it survive.
